All right, we're back on.
All right.
And I'm going to ask you a couple of factual questions.
Wait, I decided I wanted to be a nurse, and then I went to... I had been in the van, and I... Oh, no!
No, I wasn't in the van.
I was an actress at the Brave New Workshop in Minneapolis.
And it was satirical improvisational theater, and it was the antithesis of everything that I had.
You're a single woman at this time.
All it did was... Yes.
All right.
Was I ever.
All...
All I did was make fun of things.
And that's not how I am.
It's really the opposite of how I am.
And it took a terrible psychic toll and I just quit doing it.
And I went to California and I had decided I wanted to be a nurse.
Now had you graduated from any of these schools?
No, I was a dropout.
Well, I felt like it.
If I wasn't tired, I was very upset.
So I lived in this crummy apartment.
It was truly crummy.
We're out in Berkeley now.
I was living in Minneapolis.
I had just quit being an actress.
I heard someone upstairs.
Did you have any acting roles, by the way?
It's a very important story, Nick.
Now, you better pay attention.
I'm paying attention.
I was a very good actress.
Well, I mean, did you actually act, though?
Yes, I was in this troupe.
It was an improvisational theater.
You call Minneapolis and ask him about the Great New York chapter, it's a very big deal.
Very big deal.
I'm so surprised I never heard.
Anyway, so I was lying in bed listening to somebody throw up.
And he found it so sick.
It was a bad kind of throwing up.
It wasn't the get in there and get it over with kind of throwing up.
It was a gut-wrenching kind of throw.
And my impulse was not one of annoyance because he was waking me up at 3 o'clock in the morning.
I wanted nothing more than to go up there and say, can I help you?
I felt so sad for him.
And I decided I wanted to be a nurse.
I decided that what was biggest in me was that need to
to be compassionate and to help people.
I really, really want to do it.
And I also felt like when people are sick, there's just no bullshit going on.
You know, they are really, truly themselves, especially when they're critically ill, which is what drew me to critical care, was that there was no bullshit going on anymore.
And you could really... Can we use that word?
Do you mind if we use that word, by the way?
Is that bullshit?
Yeah.
God, I don't care.
Okay, all right.
And the feeling that you get pulling somebody through a critical illness or seeing somebody walk out of there is like Noah.
There's nothing, nothing better.
I don't care if you get two good reviews in a row.
I don't care if your book sells a million copies.
There's nothing that comes close to touching that one life in that most intimate of ways of seeing somebody
It's incredible.
Anyway, and similarly, sort of, when you're 28 years old and you take care of somebody who's 28 years old, there's nothing like that either.
There's nothing like that.
It's funny, the doctor who delivered our first child had been for some time an oncologist, a young guy.
So that was a pertinent point, wasn't it?
Yeah, and there's a couple of ways to look at that kind of thing, and I think the difference is most manifest when you talk.
I don't know if you've ever had the chance to talk to hospice people, but they're the ones who really get it.
They're the ones who aren't afraid.
to be with people who are dying and who really find so much fulfillment and so much positive life force and that kind of thing.
I asked an oncologist once who was giving me a lecture about something, how he dealt with the sadness.
And he wouldn't talk about it.
He said, it's hard sometimes.
Next.
So, you know, and I thought, that guy's not going to last in oncology.
So, anyway.
So there is a degree of humanity that's essential then.
I think you have to have
I think it's unbearable unless you have a certain kind of attitude.
Grounded, I think, mostly in understanding that you're not exactly permanent yourself and that there are ways to leave that are noble and open and loving and there are ways to leave this life that are full of denial and pain and regret.
And that's perhaps the greatest lesson that we ever learn is that
to try to orient yourself toward that kind of closure.
I mean, who knows?
Whatever.
Now, to answer the question briefly, where did you finally train to be a nurse?
St.
Mary's Junior College in Minneapolis.
Oh, so you did.
But you told me you didn't finish.
No.
I didn't finish the University of Minnesota.
I dropped out.
I went to California.
I wanted to be a nurse.
I went to Merritt Junior College in California, which is where I put a fortune in.
I knew Lake Merritt.
It's right on Oakland.
I know what that is.
After they moved to the fancy campuses.
The old campuses in the city, and then Bobby Seale and Huey Newton were walking around saying, you know.
That's it.
And I went to class like a good little white girl.
What an idiot.
I was the only one.
Everybody was on strike, and I was saying, are we going to have math class today?
But, yeah, so I started, I took classes there, but I didn't get into nursing school.
Then I came back to Minnesota, and I wanted to hurry up and get my RN, and the fastest way to get an RN was to go to a two-year school, so I did that.
Do you remember what year that was that you finished?
You must.
74.
Okay.
So you actually were a nurse for a good 12 years then?
Yeah, I've practiced as a nurse for over 10 years.
See how I finally got to that?
Then you know what comes.
The factual question comes an hour and a half later.
We did very well.
It's very Socratic.
It's all embroidered and everything.
Good stuff, good stuff.
All right.
This is very good.
Now we can get down to the writing.
Would you say the writing?
of your second novel was a therapeutic exercise as a response to what you were going through.
I mean, given, and also the fact that you lost a friend from breast cancer.
Yeah.
It was such a huge event.
Look at all the notes I took for this interview.
I haven't referred to any of them yet.
Isn't that how it goes?
Yeah.
Well, that's how you know.
That's like when you outline a book and then you say, okay, that's that.
You never use it.
Exactly.
Then you know you've got the good job.
I didn't outline my whole book.
The book that I wrote had 250,000 words.
Honest to God.
I mean, I never outline a single chapter.
Good.
I absolutely look forward to it.
And there's pieces that won't be outlined at all.
This piece will be, we'll sit down, whatever the lead is.
Whatever I feel, I enter the piece, and then it goes where it has to go.
Exactly.
Now I'm blabbing, and I'm going to be so furious when I listen to this.
If you're listening to this, all I have to say is you're absolutely right.
The man will not shut up.
Blabber mode.
It goes like this to me.
Anyway, look.
Here is this beautiful woman.
We have a picture of her in the house, and isn't she a
What a gorgeous picture.
She's lovely.
Tony King took that picture.
You certainly know him.
Tony's a very good friend of mine.
Ask him about Gretchen Miller.
Don't use her name on the interview.
I won't.
But a lovely, we can say, photograph.
You have a photograph of this as a lovely woman.
Yeah, yeah.
Tony's very, you know Tony?
Tony's a very good friend of mine.
I think he is amazing.
I want to marry him.
I would leave my husband
Just like that.
Yeah, I know him because of Brady, because she brought me to his slideshows.
And not only are his photographs extraordinary, but his narrative is even more... Yeah, I lived in Southbrook too.
That's what I said, you lived in Southbrook, so you were neighbors.
Yeah, but his narrative is extraordinary.
When he's showing you those pictures, what he says makes all the girls just faint.
Al just goes, oh, yes you can.
Anyway, so...
So when this happened, I just needed to do something with all these feelings.
And it's horrible that she died, and I still miss her, and I still go to call her.
I still think I'm going to call her to go with me somewhere.
She was a contemporary, same approximate age.
Yeah, she was gorgeous.
She was really funny.
She was so lively.
She was up for anything all the time.
She was much like Ruth in that respect.
The way that she was not like Ruth is what I already told you in terms of accepting and all that stuff.
She said, I think I didn't get around to telling you, probably because you interrupted me.
But anyway, on the day she went to get, she had just, it just kept being worse and worse and worse and worse.
She went to get chemotherapy again, but first they were going to do a
a chest x-ray and a CAT scan.
And so they did that and it was everywhere.
And there was no point in doing chemotherapy.
He told her, I'm not going to do it.
How old was she?
She was 44.
And I'm not going to do any, there's no point.
I'm not going to do this.
And she said, there's nothing you can do, John.
And he said, no.
And she said, well, I'm not going to die.
I'm not.
And he just
didn't say anything.
I mean, she just would not.
She, ironically enough, did arrange for her funeral, and she wrote something for her funeral, at my suggestion.
The first line of what she wrote at her funeral, and this will tell you what she was like, said to her assembled friends and relatives, well, I guess you're all as surprised to be here as I am.
Who read it?
The guy who did the service.
Anyway, so it was really horrible, but it was... Do you remember what year she died?
It was three years ago.
But it was horrible, but it was also sort of wonderful in May 8th.
So it was really contemporaneous with the writing of this book then?
I wrote it very soon after, yeah.
Because I meant for this book to be a tribute to...
I was so honored to be among this group of women who cared for her, who were not the people in the book.
But this was a woman around here, a Massachusetts woman, is that it?
Yeah, my friend lived in Massachusetts and a lot of different friends just sort of took care of her.
She ended up going to her parents' house to die in the end.
Not unlike the scenario here.
And I did that not because it was like what happened, I did that because I think it's so typical that people
when they're dying end up going back home.
So was it a literary device for you to have her die off stage in that manner?
I don't think of it as a literary device.
I think of it as a reflection of some truth, which is that when people get to the end of the line, they very often times, particularly if they're not married, you know, if they don't have an immediate family, will go, a lot of aides, you know, who go home to their
You see it in the obits all the time.
Yeah.
Because the New York Times tells you the cause of death.
And you'll see he lived in San Francisco.
Died in Kansas.
He died in Canton, Mass.
That's right.
And I just saw one like that a week ago.
It happens all the time.
And there's a very strong pull, even when you've been estranged from that family, to go back.
And, you know, I could talk for hours about why that is.
So it was a tribute to your friend.
I mean, some of the best times, we would be laughing uproariously.
She was dying.
We would all be laughing and I would think, what is this?
How can this be?
And so I meant it first and foremost to be a tribute to female friendship.
Secondly, and a close second, I wanted to
call attention to breast cancer in a very personal way, because there's a lot of attention paid to it, but not in this way.
But you do give some statistics at the back of the book.
That's right.
And you also, I guess, gave a percentage of your royalties.
Yeah, right.
National Breast Cancer Academy.
And it was on Oprah, you know, I was really... Did you go on Oprah?
Yeah.
And I was... That's supposed to be the best thing I could ever do.
Well, but you know what?
It was a show of... I mean, I was gratified and, you know, and it put the book on the PW list, but what I... Honestly, what I cared about that show was that the whole show was on breast cancer.
And it got the message out to a lot of people about how little research is being done, about how many women are dying from breast cancer, and so on and so on.
Susan Love was on there.
Women who, it's a very moving show, I'm telling you, you should watch it, because the people who opened the show were women who were in the terminal stages of breast cancer, talking about how they're dealing with this, talking about how, you know,
It was heartbreaking, but very effective.
And that's one of the reasons I wrote the book, was to say, listen, we need to pay attention to this, because not enough is happening in terms of research.
Now let's talk also about the support group in Talk Before Sleep.
I mean, the women who, clearly this is something you wanted to write about as well, I think.
Yeah.
I mean a lot of the reviews, I mean I got this packet of reviews that Randolph R. sent me, you know, all the reviews of this book.
You know, the women band together, I mean if you're looking for a line about how these women close ranks to help a friend through this crisis, I guess that was something that you wanted to talk about too, I guess the power of friendship and the power of relationship.
you know, that some things can be so strong that they will carry you through anything.
And also that there's, I think that there's a unique quality to men's friendships, but I'm not a man and I'm not in it and I don't know about it, but I do know about women's friendships and it's one of the best things in my life, you know, and I, one of the best things that happened with this book was going around on tour and there would be all different kinds of women who would come up to me and say,
And I mean everything from women who weighed, you know, 300 pounds and had these huge, you know, like bowling outfits, and they'd say, I've been hanging out with Sally for 35 years, and we go out every Thursday, to diminutive, beautiful little, you know, little girl women who had just been away from their homes, you know, had just had their first apartment for
a year, and they were so, their friends were so valuable to them, and you know, over and over, this was their testimonies, and of course, also people who had friends who had breast cancer, or who themselves had breast cancer, and so it was pretty, I don't think that, I don't know that anybody could do her justice in terms of, she was such a hot ticket, she really was, and
And I wanted to fictionalize it, and so it's not... I mean, you know, I wrote a couple of non-fiction articles about her.
Did you identify her?
Yeah.
I mean, by name?
No.
I showed her the article I wrote about going to get... If you remember, there's a part in the book about when they go to get the wig.
And that was pretty close to what happened, although I didn't call that woman a bitch, but I wish I could have.
But I wrote an article for a magazine about that, about how...
graceful my friend was, and how much herself.
And I showed it to her, and she said, call me Kate.
I always wanted to be named Kate.
So she was called Kate.
Do you have a, no, do your friends call you Elizabeth, or?
Some of them do.
My husband calls me Beth.
Beth, okay.
Yeah.
Do you have a perceived audience for your free books, free writing?
I mean, clearly, the magazine pieces he did was a
And I have to say that all the reviews, for instance, I saw were exclusively written by women.
It's interesting.
Maybe there was one or two men.
But I was not familiar with your work prior to this assignment.
And I have to say I love this book.
I was very surprised about how men took to this book, frankly.
I thought men would say, oh, here's another case of man-bashing.
Well, but it wasn't.
But, you know, this one wasn't man-bashing.
No, I love guys.
Plus, she's devoted to her husband.
She likes him.
She misses him.
Yes, she does.
She wants him to come back.
Yeah.
Now, Ed is kind of a jerk, but he just had to find himself.
Well, that's right.
He's not really such a jerk.
She likes him.
She likes him better.
I mean, I think that's a terrible anguish to live with, to know that something's wrong.
Something's wrong, and you're not living... I didn't pick that up, by the way.
I'm usually pretty good at picking these things.
Yeah, good, good.
I mean, I figured out...
presumed innocent."
I said, that was pretty easy.
He's a friend of mine.
He said, how the hell did you figure that out?
I said, come on, I'm an investigative reporter.
I said, the telephone calls.
The guy's narrating the telephone calls from his house to the victim's house.
He didn't do it.
Who did?
If he didn't do it, his wife did it.
I didn't read it.
It's hard to figure out though, isn't it?
I bet it is.
It is, yeah.
Yeah.
It is.
But I didn't catch this.
I should have.
Oh, good.
I should have, but you got me all that, especially when it goes into the house.
It sounded like a woman's house.
Yeah.
And that was funny.
That was a good scene, by the way, when you break into the house.
Two ballsy women, I have to say, resting into the cell.
I should take a walk with you and show you the little townhouses that I used.
You know, I was thinking of those.
There's a house that
I think of as Laney and Alice's house on my little daily walk, too.
It's a duplex.
Do they have duplexes in St.
Paul?
Actually, what originally and prior to that duplex... Because this is really three-decker country, you know.
Oh, that's my Aunt Lala's house.
She lived in a duplex.
Do you remember when Gloria the Nurse talks about that mean old lady that keeps kids bald?
the balls I play with.
Only the little boys, of course.
The little kids, beach balls.
Anyway, my Aunt Lala lived in this old duplex, and her neighbor was this mean old woman who, come on, shake her a little.
She was a real mean old lady.
But anyway, my aunt Lola's house was the inspiration for Lainey's house.
But when I go for a walk now, I see a duplex and I think there's even marks for a porch swing.
And the steps are there, you know, on the little narrow alleyway where the kids play out and back and all that stuff.
So, yeah.
And she had the old-fashioned sink and everything.
I loved that house.
And a pantry.
Ooh, a pantry.
Maybe I'm stretching here, but Talk Before Sleep is about a woman who's clearly dying.
She's alert and every second is precious.
Here you have a guy that's as good as dead, and he's not part of it at all.
I mean he is part of it, the little italicized things that are reaching out.
Nobody has no recollection.
I mean, it is kind of an interesting, they're almost imagined, they're almost a companion blog.
Yeah, yeah.
I never thought of that.
Have you thought of it that kind of thing?
No, I haven't.
That's interesting, isn't it?
It's, you know, when I was writing short stories... So I was stretching on that, or is it just a good observation?
I think it's a good observation.
I don't think that it was intentional, but I don't think that anything I do in writing, almost nothing I do in writing is really intentional.
When I used to write short stories I would start out with two or three things that I just felt like weaving together somehow into a story.
One time I read in a nature book that they were finding decapitated birds and they couldn't account for this.
They didn't know what was going on and they found out that a grackle did it.
somehow.
I just liked that sort of bizarre fact.
And then I do this thing with license plates.
When I see license plates and there's the three initials on the end, I make it be a sentence in my head, and it always tells me the state of my mind and what's going on and what I really believe.
Try that sometimes.
Just look at the license plate and let it be a sentence.
So I put that in the story, and so I mix it all up, and there you are.
It's a story that comes out with these things.
range of motion, I was very much interested in the notion of what goes on when someone's in a coma, what their level of awareness is.
As a person and as a nurse, too, I used to... Did you read Richard Selzer's book last year?
Okay.
Wait a minute.
I'm getting to that.
So I was very... When I was a nurse... Yes, obviously.
No, I didn't read it.
I didn't read it.
But when I was a nurse, I...
It was a very strange thing taking care of someone in a coma.
It was a very charged atmosphere and I would really wonder what they could hear and what they could sense and what they were thinking and feeling and so on.
And I wanted to write a book where I could represent the person in a coma's point of view.
I also wanted to write about
the wonderfulness of ordinary life, just how spectacular the little things are.
And so those were the, you know, the ingredients.
I don't want to be maudlin, but again, is this kind of born from your own recent experience, your own, and I hate to use a hackneyed phrase, your own brush with the unknown, shall we say, or uncertainty?
I think that more than any other book I've ever written, Range of Motion is about cancer, is about my own.
And even though it's not about cancer, it is.
Right.
Certainly the ending.
I also think that a lot of writers... But why the ending?
Because it has definitely a happy ending.
The last sentence, which says that I'm listening for as long as I can and I'm listening with all of my might, I think speaks for the way that I'm trying to live my life, having had that tap.
That you get clued in in a big way.
Now let me tell you how I work.
This is interesting.
I never go into one of these interviews.
I never have.
I've done hundreds of them.
I'm never happy until I have my lead.
And also I need my kicker, which is the last one.
You just gave me, I know how this story ends by the way.
Oh you do?
Well you just gave it to me.
What?
I don't know exactly how I'm going to write it.
Oh, yeah.
That's great.
You know what I'm saying?
I always like to end with, oh, wow.
That's nice.
That's very good.
Yeah.
But I realize, you know, yeah.
Did you see what I'm saying?
Yeah.
I also think that a lot of writers write about the same thing over and over and over.
It's always the same motivation, whatever theme it takes, whatever disguise it takes, that there are themes in people's lives that they want to talk about over and over.
And I think that you can see that in, well, you've heard two of them, but there's always...
life-affirming stuff, and there's always meatloaf, there's always meatloaf, and there always will be meatloaf in every book, ever, ever.
Absolutely.
It will always be there.
Did you ever conceive of yourself as a long-haul driver?
Yes.
I want to do a non-fiction book.
I want to go across country with female truck drivers.
Why is it that I got that idea?
I have come so very close to doing that, to going over to the Roy Rogers on 495, because a lot of truckers go in there, and picking one out.
But I decided it shouldn't be all women, actually.
That's my latest visit.
It should not be all women.
It should be a mix.
And just pick one out, just eating his hamburger with his mouth closed, chewing with his mouth closed.
And I would say, I know it's so bad.
I have my little suitcase.
I'd say, could I just
kind of come and you just pretend I'm not here.
Just be yourself, you know.
Let me go across the country.
I really want to do that.
It'd be a hell of a piece.
Wouldn't it be wonderful?
You could sell that anywhere.
I want to do it.
But the one I just finished is about a woman who takes off and I did a whole, you know, I can't do it yet because my kids are still too little so I had to do it in a book.
But anyway, someday truckers, oh my god, it would be so, oh, where are they, oh,
Unfortunately, so many of them go to Burger King now, but you know how there used to be all those great truck stops.
I went to graduate school at Penn State.
I went to a little college at the main Bates, and I went from one totally extreme to the other.
Oh, that's a great school, yeah.
High school.
But I remember driving out, there were always these diners.
Zimmy's Diner.
Yeah.
Zimmy's Diner was the best.
I can think of thinking it was 30 years after the fact.
You would go in and get, for one buck, of course this is the 60s, for one dollar you'd get
You get ham and eggs, home fries, and a piece of ham would be like.
Oh my God.
And I dream to this day of Jimmy's dinner, truck stuff, and there were plenty of them on Route 20.
You know, good, basic, straightforward American food, very generous portions.
And that's kind of the place we're talking about.
There is one that I used for, you know, there's one, I have to ask Howard.
It has the special room for the professional drivers only.
And then it has a smorgasbord of all horrible food that they love so much.
Kind of like the frequent flyers club, right?
Yeah.
They need to get in there and get out.
They're on a schedule, you know, and they have showers.
Indian Head, your shower is ready.
Then they have a smorgasbord, of course, all the food that I love.
Macaroni and cheese and tacos and meatloaf.
I love Fourth of July.
This is where we're going to have lots of potato salad.
Oh, oh.
And then a whole dessert cart and everything.
And then they have the store attached to it with the chains and the leather jackets and the things for trucks that you don't know what they are.
And beef jerky.
Can I just give you a cautionary word?
I mean the truckers, the things they write are the bedroom walls when they stop.
Yeah, I know.
That's why I thought I'd go with women.
I know.
But you have to get some weird ones or it wouldn't be any fun.
It's not going to happen to us.
Alone on the road.
Your husband will know what you do.
Oh, he thinks it's a great idea.
He does?
Yeah.
But whether, you know, if I were really going to do it, I don't know if he's doing it.
So tell me then... Anyway, you can go to that place, because it's in Connecticut, that truck stop, where they have the beef jerky and the chains and all that.
Do you remember where in Connecticut it is?
I think it's still here.
Howard?
Oh, thank you.
Where's that truck stop that, you know, that has the smorgasbord and the store with all that stuff?
Do you know that truck stuff we go to that has a smorgasbord and the attachment?
It's on 1884.
Do you know the name of it?
I know where that is.
The 76th station in 1884.
It's right about where I got my speeding ticket the other day.
You're going to go there.
What the hell are they talking about up there?
Go hungry.
Okay.
Unfortunately, I'm extremely happy with both my agency and the public.
They're interested in dedications and acknowledgments.
If there's anything revealing there, I don't see anything of any particularly revelatory nature from this stuff.
Your work habits, you write at home here on the second floor, and I would gather on this word processor over here.
Do you write longhand?
Do you do stuff pretty much straight on the... Magic wand.
Ah.
What is that?
It's a magic wine.
It's a Native American thing.
Tell me what it is.
I don't know.
It's stones.
Yeah.
I like rocks.
I gather.
We have stones here.
We have a lovely shelf.
Anyway, so I just saw this thing.
It's called a magic wine.
I thought this would be a good place to play.
Yeah, I don't write one.
I don't write one on this guy.
Tell me about the Tuesday morning writing group.
You should come to that.
You would have such a good time.
You really should.
Maybe I will.
When I very first started writing, I thought, you know, I told things, but I thought, well, maybe I should find out what I'm doing.
So I took a couple classes, one of which was at the Harvard Extension, I think it was writing fiction class.
I mean, Sally Brady taught it.
And Sally was immediately responsive to my work.
And she said, she wanted me to join this sort of private writing book that she had.
So I did.
And that was, oh my God, I think that was like nine years ago or something.
Eight or nine years ago.
And so I've been pretty much doing that with minor breaks for eight or nine years.
And we meet every...
you know, once a week, it used to be on Wednesday, now it's Tuesday, and we go to Sally's house, which is this beautiful, beautiful place in Bedford, and there are horses out in her backyard, and she has a beautiful garden and flowers all over the place.
In fact, she put that garden in the, come here, look at this, look at this garden.
I hired her.
I said, give me one of those gardens, and she put that.
Oh, isn't that nice?
Oh, it's just
Nice doves out there, some morning doves.
Yeah, the cardinals come and stay here all the time.
Anyway, so it's, and what we do is,
Everybody reads every time, although you don't read your own work, Sally reads it, and then you can hear how it sounds, which is pretty valuable, because it's one thing to write it, but then even when you speak it yourself into a tape recorder, I don't know if you do that, but you pick up things listening to it.
I do read stuff a lot.
I read stuff to my wife, actually, I have to say out loud.
Yeah, that's nice.
And she has a good ear, too.
And you hear things that you didn't notice when you write.
So anyway, she reads everybody's work.
We're supposed to only bring ten pages, but some of us are pigs like me.
And we say, well, I have 15, well, I have 20, but there's a lot of dialogue.
So I tend to bring more, but I have to cut it up.
And then we chat, you know, about what we all think.
Here it is.
Here's the group.
Minus Rick...
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight.
There's eight women here.
And there's Sally.
Oh, she's just the greatest.
It's a nice picture, actually, isn't it?
Yeah.
We went on a retreat to Nashana.
It was just an island.
I don't usually like those things, but I have to say it was pretty nice.
So that's where this was taken.
Anyway, so Sally's a great reader.
And it's a very thoughtful... Sally, did you give me her full name?
Brady.
And she lives in Bedford.
She lives in Bedford.
She's a writer herself.
She's also an agent.
And her husband is Upton Brady, who used to be the Atlantic Monthly Press.
And he's now an agent as well.
And so we laugh a lot.
We eat great food.
Great food.
And we drink tons of coffee, so we all talk way too much of talking.
You sit right in.
And then, you know, that's it.
And I've done, you know, they were the ones, changing memories, but you know, Sally has heard durable goods from page one all the way through.
And do they help?
Oh, yeah.
Do they offer good?
They're great.
Yeah.
I know it's also in range of motion.
Let me just say too that I could write in isolation in terms of I don't feel like what I get from that group saves my writing.
I think they make wonderful points and they catch things.
But I would write it.
But the thing that means the most to me about that group is the friendship.
Otherwise I'd be by myself all the time and I'd be talking to
It is good to get out.
Yeah, so it gets me out.
When we go to take the trash, when I was in the middle of writing, my wife would believe I really looked forward to the ride down to the dump.
Yeah, you have to clear your head.
I love getting out to the post office.
Well, the dump is a good thing now.
I mean, you know, you're talking a good thing.
Do you get to dump the Bibles?
All that stuff, yeah.
There you are.
Get to hear them crash, yeah.
But yeah, you have to get out.
I like also the fact that in these two novels, and do you see them as novels or novellas, by the way, in your mind?
Would you say you're writing... Well, I mean, how do you decide?
Is it page count or is it content or is it emotional resonance?
I mean, let's call them little novels because I think...
I like to think, anyway, that there's a little more to them than the word novella might suggest, although there are, of course, fabulous novellas.
Like, you know, The Age of Grief.
The Age of Grief, you know.
The Old Man in the Sea wasn't bad.
Wasn't bad.
He should have gone to a truck stop before he went out on the ocean, though.
Would have vastly improved it.
No.
Yeah, exactly.
But I guess, you know.
That's fine.
I mean, I think it's a good thing.
I think it's a good thing.
It's a good thing.
the permissiveness of it, you know, the knowledge that you can say whatever you want is, um, that's not, I don't think any dialogue's been actually lifted from.
I'm trying to think.
Um, Alice was born, so to speak, because a very good friend of mine was talking about a woman who he'd seen who was pretty spectacularly unattractive, I mean, amazingly unattractive, and he said, but you know,
I looked at her again, and she didn't seem unattractive.
She just seemed so strong.
So I thought, oh, I like the notion of that.
She gets her reward in the end, too, doesn't she?
Sure.
After a visit.
I love those smart guys.
And she seems content in the relationship, too, which is important.
Have I missed anything, do you think?
Do you think I've pretty much covered it?
Can you think of anything that you'd like to tell me that I haven't... Okay, when I went to the dentist in Newton the first time, I had to fill out the form, you know, the health form, and all that.
How do you prefer to be addressed?
Me?
No, that's what I said on the form.
Because, you know, I'm a doctor.
And I put, Your Highness.
So, you might want to just...
Keep that in mind.
I'm kidding!
No, I don't think there's... I mean, that's a true story.
He's a wonderful dentist.
He kisses your forehead when you leave.
I don't think so.
I think we've got... You do have a great deal of respect for your reader.
Yes, I do.
The people that you don't see, but the people you know who are out there.
Yeah.
Because you do address them in your books.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, and I think that, well, this is probably true more in the 19th world than in the book world, but I think that readers are very often underestimated in terms of what they can appreciate and comprehend and all that stuff.
Do you think that you're writing for a lot of the same readers that you have in the magazines?
Do you think they've kind of...
I like to think, you know what, you know how there's those crossover songs, you know, like Country Western that makes it in the mainstream, and I like to think that that's what I do in writing, that yes, that those people who enjoy reading me in magazines will enjoy the novels, but I also like to, I hope that I write an accessible kind of literary fiction, and that it does have a literary quality that people can
And you don't have a specific reader, you can't see this reader?
You can see this reader when you're writing?
If I'm forced to classify myself I would say that it's probably truest to say that I write about women for women.
I mean that seems to be what I'm doing.
But you're certainly happy when you find men who work.
I'm delighted, yes.
Do you get fan mail?
Yeah.
And how does it run in terms of sex?
Oh, you know what?
Ten-to-one women, or is it?
That's probably pretty close.
That's a good guess.
You know what?
There's a woman who has a terrible chronic cancer.
She's really not doing that at all.
I mean, there's a good thing you talk about.
I had a male.
Naturally, I thought, oh, it's too hard for her to talk, and it's too hard for her to write, so she puts all the letters here and all the numbers, and there's everything.
So, yeah, that means a lot, those letters.
Do you answer them?
Yep.
Everyone.
Well, I want to.
I think I've got...
I think I've got everything.
Of course, if I don't, I can call you.
Sure.
Now, are these your seashells or your kids?
Do you like seashells?
Gretty.
We all love seashells.
Gretty, my friend.
That's hers.
Really?
I love them, too.
Those are hers.
They came from her house after she... Really?
Yeah.
She left me her...
You see, I asked a question.
That's a hell of a detail.
That's quite a detail.
Yeah, she left me her bird's nest on her shelf.
I have some bird's nests.
Some of those are mine and some are hers up there.
Four bird's nests up there on her bookcase.
Yeah, there's one here and there's one here.
Wait, did you say you collect bird's nests and rocks and shelves?
Yeah.
These are things?
Is this a fascination for nature?
There's a big one inside my bed in case I get scared.
I hold on to it.
Why?
Why is it, what kind of, what is it about?
It's like when you're drunk and the room is spinning around and you have to go like this, you know, so the room stops spinning.
Of course I've only heard that, I don't know, from personal experience.
I understand.
But when there are moments of great anxiety.
And at times when, you know, if the rash is back, if there's cancer stuff going on, you know, I hold on to it.
To the birds then.
No, to the rock.
I thought you said a bird's nest.
No, I had a rock.
No, if I held onto the bird's nest, it would say, oh, stop!
To the rock.
Yeah, yeah.
You know what happened the other day?
I was writing a scene.
I was finishing this book I just finished, and it was a pretty hot scene.
And a lot of times I light candles when I work.
And I turn it around.
Right here?
In here?
I turned around and this, I had a candle in here, and it was like a Bunsen burner, and it had gone up the dark, it went, and it was, and it was, and it was, and the flame, the flame was shooting out of here, it was real close.
These are my books here.
Yeah.
Look, here it is.
This is, this is the Dutch version of Talk Before Sleep.
It's called, Let's Talk Some More.
It works.
Anyway, I was shooting out, so I had to come flying over to get my fist to push that.
Ooh, it was really a wonderful comment.
So you've given me the title of These are quilts.
This is my other passion, quilting.
Quilting.
Quilting and cooking.
Food.
And when do you do the quilting?
Do you do thatI mean, are you a verydo you have a good routine?
Do you have a Yeah, come look at this.
I dookay, I write in the morning.
The closer I am to sleep, the better.
because you're sort of still plugged into that, you know, subconscious placement.
And I'll usually write for a couple hours.
The other day I wrote from 7 in the morning until 6.30 at night, which is very unusual.
I usually write for a few hours.
And then I cook and, you know, I won't say in the piece, by the way, that you live in Natick.
I will just say that you live in a Boston suburb.
So this is Jenny's quilt that I need to quilt, and that's one that Julie started, my older daughter.
She's starting one there.
So you actually have a full setup down here.
What would you call this room?
We're in the basement right now.
This is my sewing area.
This is all my... I love fabric.
I love it.
It's like an addiction.
Anyway.
I would say this is a pretty sophisticated work room that you've set up.
Yes, this is really nice because all my stuff can be cut.
What do you call this stuff here?
This is, when you're cutting, this is razor sharp, so watch out.
I'm not touching.
This is just the math that you use when you lay the fabric out and then you go whoosh and you cut through all kinds of layers.
I was going to show you my fabulous fish fabric.
But do you work on this every day or do you take time?
More in the winter than in the summer.
But I get into things.
Like if I'm making something, I'll come down and work on it every day.
I just made a robe that I was down here every day for.
And this is, ooh, there's a cancer blaster.
See?
You come down here.
If you're in a very good mood, you weigh yourself, otherwise you bypass that.
Then you come down here and then you take off all your clothes.
And then you say...
Don't take me now, because I'm having too much fun.
I need to stand in front of this guy.
It's like one, two, three, four, to get all four quadrants.
What is it?
This is ultraviolet light.
For those fluorescent bulbs there.
Mm-hmm.
And I use it for half a minute.
You can use it for more, but I don't need to.
You call it a cancer blaster?
That's what it is.
And yes, where do you go?
Jeez.
And then at this point I'm doing it twice a week.
Look, here it's a little bit.
Isn't that pretty?
That's nice.
Yeah, that's a gorgeous poster.
They told me that Rizzoli's asked for a poster of my book.
Oh, you're kidding.
Ooh, that's the creme de la creme.
Well, it's the most gorgeous dust jacket.
I can't take any credit for it, this artist.
It's just magnificent.
Yeah, but she did something just spectacular.
It does say gift book.
Yeah, that's an idea.
Anyway.
Ooh, that'll be nice.
Let's hold it.
Hello, Cody.
Cody, Cody is, what kind of a dog is Cody?
He's a tricolor collie.
A nice... He's got flowers from Sally Birdie's garden.
Lovely.
And I have to have flowers at all times.
So in the winter it's a problem.
But I don't grow by them.
But they're really... That's a lovely garden outside.
Isn't that something?
A flower garden.
Oh, great.
My wife loves, has a nice flower garden.
I mean, vegetables we can buy at the fruit store.
I like tomatoes and basil.
Yeah, we do herbs.
I have to say we also do herbs, yeah.
Want a brownie?
Sure.
There's Shannon, the cat.
Oh.
Good.
Oh, oh, you know what happened?
The premise, yeah.
Okay, so listen, I was interested in the idea of what went on in a coma.
And I never like to do research before I write a book.
That's very important.
Yeah, go ahead.
No, I don't like to do it because I don't want it to inform anything in me.
I want it all to come intuitively.
And then, maybe I'll do some research when I'm all done to see if it's possibly true.
So what happened was I started writing Range of Motion and then I said, oh, this is really stupid.
This is so stupid to
To represent somebody in a coma is a ridiculous idea, and I'm sure it's totally inaccurate.
So I went to the library, and I found Richard Selzer in a magazine article.
And the way that he describes, you know, when he refers to himself in the first time, it was exactly the same kind of mood that I was looking for.
And he does that in the book, actually.
I interviewed him on that book.
So I said, okay, fine, that's fine from the universe.
Plus I said, oh, it's so stupid.
Who's going to care about ordinary life?
I'm the only one that's so crazy about ordinary life.
Nobody's going to like, you know.
And I also found on that same day a little tiny article, I think it was in Life magazine, about a farmer who fell out of a barn.
It's not funny.
But he fell out of a barn and he hit his head.
And he was in a coma for six years.
And his wife went to his bedside and talked to him about ordinary life.
And he recovered, and he's fine.
And you read this after you wrote the book.
I read those two things when I had started writing it.
I guess I was about 50 or 60 pages into it.
And so I looked upon that as a nod from the universe.
And then I called Mary Kay Blakely and said, Hey, Mary Kay, Mary Kay, you were in a coma.
You want to read this manuscript and see if it sounds right?
And she did.
And she said, yeah.
Well, that was enough research.
But where did you get the idea for that particular... Between 20 minutes up and up, huh?
We have a sleeping cat over there in a basket in the kitchen, too.
A shadow.
He's as old as Jenny.
So you have a number of animals around, which is... We used to have two dogs and two cats.
The idea for the premise...
of this freak accident which sends Jay off into this coma.
I had a girlfriend that that happened to.
She didn't go in a coma, but she was walking by a building and the ice went... Jeez.
So it really hurt her.
It really hurt her neck.
But she didn't get knocked out or anything.
No, it's sort of silly, isn't it?
But it just goes to show you.
I mean, the most amazing things happen that way.
You know, you...
That's how life is.
It's so sloppy and common.
But the idea of putting him into a coma as the means to go through all of this.
And how long is the coma in the novel, by the way?
I don't think I was alert to that.
I think it's three or four months.
And is that common, uncommon?
Does this happen?
It really, really varies.
This is mine here?
Yeah.
Oh, boy.
Wait, should I put it on a plate?
No, it's fine.
Like some milk?
No, thanks.
You don't?
And I'm not a milkman.
Oh, well, you better have something to drink with it, though.
What will it be?
I have water.
It would be nice.
You want a martini?
I love martini.
And here?
The only one.
That's like a Bombay Sapphire.
It has to be.
That's the indulgence at our home on Saturday nights.
My wife has a gin and tonic, and I do have an extra dry, like I walk by with a removed martini.
Okay.
Here's how you do the remove.
You hold the glass up and say, and that's it.
And, if you really want the martini, you can use these.
Which idea?
Onion stuffed dollars.
Just spray it.